Harry stood, tense, waiting for Riddle to raise his wand. But Riddle’s twisted smile waswidening again.“Now, Harry, I’m going to teach you a little lesson. Let’s match the powers of Lord Voldemort,Heir of Salazar Slytherin, against famous Harry Potter, and the best weapons Dumbledore cangive him…”He cast an amused eye over Fawkes and the Sorting Hat, then walked away. Harry, fearspreading up his numb legs, watched Riddle stop between the high pillars and look up into thestone face of Slytherin, high above him in the half-darkness. Riddle opened his mouth wide andhissed — but Harry understood what he was saying…“Speak to me, Slytherin, greatest of the Hogwarts Four.”Harry wheeled around to look up at the statue, Fawkes swaying on his shoulder.Slytherin’s gigantic stone face was moving. Horrorstruck, Harry saw his mouth opening, widerand wider, to make a huge black hole.And something was stirring inside the statue’s mouth. Something was slithering up from itsdepths.Harry backed away until he hit the dark Chamber wall, and as he shut his eyes tight he feltFawkes’ wing sweep his cheek as he took flight. Harry wanted to shout, “Don’t leave me!” butwhat chance did a phoenix have against the king of serpents?Something huge hit the stone floor of the Chamber. Harry felt it shudder — he knew what washappening, he could sense it, could almost see the giant serpent uncoiling itself from Slytherin’smouth. Then he heard Riddle’s hissing voice:“Kill him.”The basilisk was moving toward Harry; he could hear its heavy body slithering heavily acrossthe dusty floor. Eyes still tightly shut, Harry began to run blindly sideways, his handsoutstretched, feeling his way — Voldemort was laughing.Harry tripped. He fell hard onto the stone and tasted blood the serpent was barely feet from him,he could hear it coming.There was a loud, explosive spitting sound right above him, and then something heavy hit Harryso hard that he was smashed into the wall. Waiting for fangs to sink through his body he heardmore mad hissing, something thrashing wildly off the pillars.He couldn’t help it — he opened his eyes wide enough to squint at what was going on.The enormous serpent, bright, poisonous green, thick as an oak trunk, had raised itself high in the


air and its great blunt head was weaving drunkenly between the pillars. As Harry trembled, readyto close his eyes if it turned, he saw what had distracted the snake.Fawkes was soaring around its head, and the basilisk was snapping furiously at him with fangslong and thin as sabers Fawkes dived. His long golden beak sank out of sight and a suddenshower of dark blood spattered the floor. The snake’s tail thrashed, narrowly missing Harry, andbefore Harry could shut his eyes, it turned — Harry looked straight into its face and saw that itseyes, both its great, bulbous yellow eyes, had been punctured by the phoenix; blood wasstreaming to the floor, and the snake was spitting in agony.“NO!” Harry heard Riddle screaming. “LEAVE THE BIRD! LEAVE THE BIRD! THE BOY ISBEHIND YOU. YOU CAN STILL SMELL HIM. KILL HIM!”The blinded serpent swayed, confused, still deadly. Fawkes was circling its head, piping his eeriesong, jabbing here and there at its scaly nose as the blood poured from its ruined eyes.“Help me, help me,” Harry muttered wildly, “someone — anyone…”The snake’s tail whipped across the floor again. Harry ducked. Something soft hit his face.The basilisk had swept the Sorting Hat into Harry’s arms. Harry seized it. It was all he had left,his only chance — he rammed it onto his head and threw himself flat onto the floor as thebasilisk’s tail swung over him again.Help me — help me — Harry thought, his eyes screwed tight under the hat. Please help me.There was no answering voice. Instead, the hat contracted, as though an invisible hand wassqueezing it very tightly.Something very hard and heavy thudded onto the top of Harry’s head, almost knocking him out.Stars winking in front of his eyes, he grabbed the top of the hat to pull it off and felt somethinglong and hard beneath it.A gleaming silver sword had appeared inside the hat, its handle glittering with rubies the size ofeggs.“KILL THE BOY! LEAVE THE BIRD! THE BOY IS BEHIND YOU. SNIFF — SMELLHIM.”Harry was on his feet, ready. The basilisk’s head was falling, its body coiling around, hittingpillars as it twisted to face him. He could see the vast, bloody eye sockets, see the mouthstretching wide, wide enough to swallow him whole, lined with fangs long as his sword, thin,glittering, venomous —It lunged blindly — Harry dodged and it hit the Chamber wall. It lunged again, and its forkedtongue lashed Harry’s side. He raised the sword in both his hands —


The basilisk lunged again, and this time its aim was true — Harry threw his whole weight behindthe sword and drove it to the hilt into the roof of the serpent’s mouth —But as warm blood drenched Harry’s arms, he felt a searing pain just above his elbow. One long,poisonous fang was sinking deeper and deeper into his arm and it splintered as the basiliskkeeled over sideways and fell, twitching, to the floor.Harry slid down the wall. He gripped the fang that was spreading poison through his body andwrenched it out of his arm. But he knew it was too late. White-hot pain was spreading slowly andsteadily from the wound. Even as he dropped the fang and watched his own blood soaking hisrobes, his vision went foggy. The Chamber was dissolving in a whirl of dull color.A patch of scarlet swam past, and Harry heard a soft clatter of claws beside him.“Fawkes,” said Harry thickly. “You were fantastic, Fawkes…”He felt the bird lay its beautiful head on the spot where the serpent’s fang had pierced him.He could hear echoing footsteps and then a dark shadow moved in front of him.“You’re dead, Harry Potter,” said Riddle’s voice above him. “Dead. Even Dumbledore’s birdknows it. Do you see what he’s doing, Potter? He’s crying.”Harry blinked. Fawke’s head slid in and out of focus. Thick, pearly tears were trickling down theglossy feathers.“I’m going to sit here and watch you die, Harry Potter. Take your time. I’m in no hurry.”Harry felt drowsy. Everything around him seemed to be spinning.“So ends the famous Harry Potter,” said Riddle’s distant voice. “Alone in the Chamber ofSecrets, forsaken by his friends, defeated at last by the Dark Lord he so unwisely challenged.You’ll be back with your dear Mudblood mother soon, Harry… She bought you twelve years ofborrowed time… but Lord Voldemort got you in the end, as you knew he must…”If this is dying, thought Harry, it’s not so bad.Even the pain was leaving him…But was this dying? Instead of going black, the Chamber seemed to be coming back into focus.Harry gave his head a little shake and there was Fawkes, still resting his head on Harry’s arm. Apearly patch of tears was shining all around the wound — except that there was no wound.“Get away, bird,” said Riddle’s voice suddenly. “Get away from him — I said, get away —”Harry raised his head. Riddle was pointing Harry’s wand at Fawkes; there was a bang like a gun,


and Fawkes took flight again in a whirl of gold and scarlet.“Phoenix tears…” said Riddle quietly, staring at Harry’s arm. “Of course… healing powers… Iforgot…”He looked into Harry’s face. “But it makes no difference. In fact, I prefer it this way. Just youand me, Harry Potter… you and me…”He raised the wand…Then, in a rush of wings, Fawkes had soared back overhead and something fell into Harry’s lap— the diary.For a split second, both Harry and Riddle, wand still raised, stared at it. Then, without thinking,without considering, as though he had meant to do it all along, Harry seized the basilisk fang onthe floor next to him and plunged it straight into the heart of the book.There was a long, dreadful, piercing scream. Ink spurted out of the diary in torrents, streamingover Harry’s hands, flooding the floor. Riddle was writhing and twisting, screaming and flailingand then —He had gone. Harry’s wand fell to the floor with a clatter and there was silence. Silence exceptfor the steady drip drip of ink still oozing from the diary. The basilisk venom had burned asizzling hole right through it.Shaking all over, Harry pulled himself up. His head was spinning as though he’d just traveledmiles by Floo powder. Slowly, he gathered together his wand and the Sorting Hat, and, with ahuge tug, retrieved the glittering sword from the roof of the basilisk’s mouth.Then came a faint moan from the end of the Chamber. Ginny was stirring. As Harry hurriedtoward her, she sat up. Her bemused eyes traveled from the huge form of the dead basilisk, overHarry, in his blood-soaked robes, then to the diary in his hand. She drew a great, shuddering gaspand tears began to pour down her face.“Harry — oh, Harry — I tried to tell you at b-breakfast, but I c-couldn’t say it in front of Percy— it was me, Harry — but I — I s-swear I d-didn’t mean to — R-Riddle made me, he t-took meover — and — how did you kill that — that thing? W-where’s Riddle? The last thing I r-remember is him coming out of the diary —”“ It’s all right,” said Harry, holding up the diary, and showing Ginny the fang hole, “Riddle’sfinished. Look! Him and the basilisk. C’mon, Ginny, let’s get out of here —”“I’m going to be expelled!” Ginny wept as Harry helped her awkwardly to her feet. “I’ve lookedforward to coming to Hogwarts ever since B-Bill came and n-now I’ll have to leave and — w-what’ll Mum and Dad say?”